The "Dungeon interaction" borrow suggestion sounds pretty solid. Ambush style encounters where, if you take too long to dispatch the group of enemies, more may rank in file to join. When reaching a section with a puzzle, the player may determine based on context if it's a requirement to advance or clear, or totally optional and offers a renewable side reward.

The Mapping might be a bit much for a Dungeon system, unless it itself is a dungeon(s) core mechanic, and due to the possibility that it's cumbersome to complete, offer nothing mandatory. Clearing all of the available "Mapping Dungeons" could offer its own achievement, incentivising them, as well as unique rewards tied to them for a mapping activity that involves Japanese. It would still need to be a reward that is not so major it defeats the purpose of the base activity, but still offer enough reason outside of the achievement to complete them.

Evolving communities is a super fantastic system, truly Umazing. After some wider story beats, old towns could be reshaped, NPCs have new dialogue, etc. Those same NPCs could have a variable routine system, where after solving the region's major event(s), they'll shuffle around what they're doing, pathing to, located primarily, and what shuffles their routine could just be external region story beats, defeating an enemy outside the map and returning, walking around maps that are far enough away (2 or 3+ screens away, so travel feels like it took some time). It could also just revolve around a day/night system that is not yet implemented.

Triple Triad/Queen's Blood style strategy game.. my first thought is Shogi - Japanese "Chess" in a way. We already have Shiritori implemented at a basic level, which can also be expanded upon. There's other options for strategy that make fun distractions. Having a card game system, be it just collectible or playable in some form, would need to make sense given the scope of the world.

Given our current enemy diversity, combinations and "approach" means little - we typically have Battle flow in an expectant pattern, which can totally feel stale quickly. Giving more agency in using learnt words to change the flow of battle -- especially if we add more enemy slots past 3, or more unique mechanics and enemy types -- would be really good. It just needs to feel natural and provide a "Wow!" moment to people who pay more attention. It's not an excuse to tie in an elemental weakness system because it's shared nearly universally among JRPGs. There can be things like an enemy on Fire being hit with a Wind-type response flaring up more, or a truly Fire-type enemy like a sentient flame of years' past to respond accordingly with effects like being snuffed out by earth or water, emboldened by fire or wind, or other things that may exist. Giving more general response choices should not just have full whiffs, or one-off use cases, though. It would need a lot of thought to be carefully implemented in a meaningful way. Good idea, nonetheless.

The 100 Trials-type dungeon should have consistent checkpoints, with an option to return to the surface/entrance and come back where you left off, should you solve a puzzle, riddle, or otherwise a unique encounter that offers a reprieve, storing exact floor state. It can also allow you to restart the floor you were on if you exit without one of the vetted retreat methods. Where it would mean most is if your health and status persisted throughout harder dungeons. Currently every battle is fresh, likely so as not to add unnecessary pressure. There's also no implemented usable item system as far as I can tell, so long-form challenges would need a useful, limiting way to probably use resources around the dungeon alongside your weaving to manage resources or health appropriately. Having a backpack full of healing items and salves is not the answer here, when there's room to allow players' creativity and environmental knowledge. It can even have recurring NPCs delve in alongside the player and be found via exploration or pure chance - not a guaranteed encounter. If you can recall key moments with them that happened throughout the story, answer their questions or otherwise impress them with a joke they'd appreciate based on what you know of them (Suzu interaction, example), you'll be rewarded better. Finding them at all should be a clear aide, regardless.

As regions get expanded and added, there's good ways to incorporate the English prompts requiring Japanese sentence construction. It doesn't need to be refactored or shoehorned into existing content.

Usage/Accuracy for Words/Kanji/Kana should be tracked adequately; how often you get assisted, need to redo strokes, etc. Once a player feels confident in their ability, they could take handwriting/comprehension mastery tests to earn inconsequential gold stars based on groups of words/kanji/kana. There's room for it in the Ledger, easy addition. It would be a way for players to feel good about understanding more in grouping, rather than "I wrote this Kanji 100~1000 times". It should be a reinforcement of the why you learn the way you do and how it helps you understand clearly. These sort of "mastery tests" should still have hints, but not award the gold star if you were overly assisted.

Totally optional, reactive dungeons that scale in size and content with your weaker skills is truly a great idea. It incentivizes exploration, study with intent without the promise of in-game reward, and a unique learning experience compared to some other parts of the game that can feel standardized.

Unique scenarios can pop up between regions, including optional side dungeons, that warrant learning something totally new and tests how well you can apply known grammar rules effectively. Something like a random event that always happens the first time you enter a road between regions, seems urgent, and you definitely always have the resources/responses to solve, without leaving the map. If a player chooses to ignore it or leave and come back, it could disappear for some time. When solved, a repeatable experience could randomly show up to fill in for the unique, tailored scenario, while still retaining its key lesson and value.

Growth via challenge should 100% be offered to players at various points, never forced unto them. It should not flip a switch permanently or subtly to a higher tier of learning, just nudge new, unfamiliar experiences into their path and see if they're willing or able to resolve a given situation. Backing out should never be punished.

Achievements should be included for the long-term, along with detailed badges, stamps or seals you collect in correspondence with those achievements. It should always be a meaningful key moment, completing a chapter or region, all side quests, all types of a dungeon, the big trial dungeon, etc. Simple lists or trackers are out of the question, unless it's something like "Used 15 Unique responses" or similar guaranteed achievements you'd naturally get by completing the main story.

New regions are pretty high on the idea list, but without experiencing all the current ones, I can't comment much yet on what I'd like them to encompass as a theme. I did see that Saltglass was coastal with boats, so maybe after chapter 2 is completed the player can make a deal with the Harbourmaster to resolve another long-form quest spanning into Chapter 5 or later, and in reward be granted access to a ferry/boat. With that reward, the player will gain access to a Sailing activity, with training/learning opportunities related to the sea, sea travel, islands, distant lands, etc. - It would have systems in place to allow a travel log, random events, a way for the player to interact with the ship directly and manually, not just via prompts or text. It would be impossible to fail travel, and the interim activity could be optionally skippable so the player does not have to do a lengthy "minigame" if they just want to move from port to port. It could provide access to regions that have ports if you've reached them further in the story.
This activity could also be introduced as a way to access a unique side region built up throughout the story, with sprinkled folklore and mystique the player would hear about. Its own look and feel would be especially mystical, and only accessible via this activity by this point, but would become accessible some chapters later, regardless of the sidequest completion. This allows a way for players to branch off from the main story and experience quests and stories from other places naturally, if they're attentive enough up front.
Other regions would need to be properly fleshed out, with their own unique systems, rewards and stories. Not every region needs something inherently new added to it that is the key focus, but should allow a fresh experience reliably every chapter or area. New abilities or words could be brought backwards to previous regions to help resolve new/old sidequests, access other hidden areas that require a resolution with a newer mechanic first, etc.

Dialects and culturally as you've described it is perfect. It's not a must-have, but would be very cool to see added, especially alongside the "Evolving Communities" notion. You can step in to help out a turbulent situation between a group of people, without fear of retaliation for "butting your nose in" or such. Lots of simple cultural experiences can be shown off, too, without forcing a modern Japan into the style of the game.

All 10 entries from headers A, B, and D are solid.
Of the 10 from header C, your one "Meh" rating for #29 is valid. We don't need positioning at current scope. I did especially like some of the battle ideas therein; we could stumble upon an encounter, a larger group, and instead of defending ourselves outright, we assess the situation based on what each member of the group is doing, and use a response to best suit the situation as we see fit. There could be elimination of a group member by choosing incorrectly or waiting idly by enough. This would have a permanent effect on a quest's story, but not ultimately affect the greater scope of the main story. Side quests don't necessarily need just one outcome - we can provide ways to let players have more agency with the stories they encounter, too, like this. Enough of these can chain together to unlock otherwise hidden content, encouraging replayability further.
All 10 entries in E are solid as well, especially entries #49 and #50 - Folklore plays a lot into my above idea, and the oldtimey word-of-mouth misunderstandings, mystery compel a fun side story. A Festival planning event that leads into a one-off Festival event with unique for-fun minigames, kimonos, firework viewings - a fun bonding activity with your companion.
Same for group F - we can leave out #60, but for someone like Suzu, who acts as and aspires to be a star, being part of a traveling troupe and comedian at heart, something like #56 is fantastic. #55, the Hot Spring Commons / Onsen does not necessarily need to steer away from bathing on-screen; characters can wear towels and nothing illicit would be shown or implied. It allows a wide breadth of scenery, and shying away from a potentially interesting / themed area due to a social stigma can come across as too restrictive. Printer's Quarter is also very interesting - players could craft stories from building blocks of words, without restraint, and not necessarily be graded on its correctness up front. They would experience their rating by interacting with people around the world who happen to be reading their printed story.

The battle system can likely be repurposed to feature non-enemy types and facilitate things like infighting groups who don't target the player, objects in the room that require a step-by-step procedure to utilize correctly, with detail. Something like the water tank in Saltglass is great for overworld puzzling, but a deep understanding challenge can be presented as a grand boss battle, where the result of failure or mistake is to restart the encounter from step 1, and learn from your mistakes. There would be an option to step away and examine the room or situation, get clues from your surroundings, or revisit it later when you've browsed more of the world or reviewed what you've learned.
This plays strongly into the 100 Trials superdungeon - it should encompass everything you've learned across the game in some fashion. It can be written in mystique, spoken as folklore - a place where only the most dedicated and studied inkweavers may prevail. Tsuru, as she was a lanternkeeper, may know more about it, as well as other key characters who fit the bill.
I love the idea of the rewards of each Trial chapter being a detailed illustration in a travel volume, so long as it holds the same fidelity as the painterly mockup style, used in our Harmony mockup at current. A full-page, fullscreen-viewable illustration is an amazing display of achievement.
The travel volume can contain full-page illustrations from memorable moments across your journey. They would be predefined unlocks, from completing a chapter or major key event within one, some side quests with weight behind them, and companion events and bonding can lead to some cute pages therein. It can even span to your saved browser at the main menu, keeping all the images for viewing at any time, even if a save had been deleted or lost. This would allow players to choose all the companions and complete the story with all of them to unlock all the illustrations, and companions could have more than one, based on the ending obtained, relevant to how they bonded with you by the end.

Crafting Economy - Exclude
Collectible Card Game - Exclude
Farming as a daily chore - Exclude
Global Difficulty Scalar - Exclude
Damage Multiplier based on "Correctness" - Exclude
Politeness/Cultural Correctness Score - Exclude
Streaks/chains - Exclude* - Can be fine for something like a Festival minigame where skill and fun are the only things measured, by the player themself. If they want a high score or streak on a minigame created for that, let them do so, since the Festival would likely be a one-off.
Unreviewed AI Dialogue Grading - Exclude; we can make appropriate consultation if we need to, but at current I have not noticed anything horribly wrong at the Elementary level by near-end Chapter 2.
Rare Rewards with RNG droprate - Exclude
Spoken pronunciation scoring - Exclude; Listening is fine, but never a requirement, as the generative voiceovers are not concrete nor always provided or available.

If I were to add more regions, I wouldn't mind extending the game's main story length. At current we have 6 main chapters, which should reasonably span around 10-20 hours. We can bring it up to a solid 10, or double it to 12 if we want The Hush to feel more epic, something drowned in folklore and mystery, and for us to ultimately remove the threat of the Hush from the world, while still maintaining our problem solving adventure thereafter. Other side regions can additionally exist, and would be encouraged as true post-game content. As written above, the Harbourmaster's boat reward could lead to another islandic region, also reachable by, say, chapter 8, if the player opted not to do the quest by that point for any reason.